## CAG Report on Eight Second Generation IITs

The CAG report on the performance of eight second-generation IITs, including IIT Bhubaneswar, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT Hyderabad, and IIT Indore, IIT Jodhpur, IIT 
Patna, IIT Mandi, and IIT Ropar is tabled in the parliament. I believe the CAG has done a more or less fair audit without going into too many micro details as 
per the newspaper report. The significant finding of the CAG audit is about the low student intake. Eight IITs together have reached an annual intake of 6K \
against a target of 18K in 2014-2019. The Directors of IITs attribute two main reasons for the low student intake:

 

 - Nonavailability of the faculty.
 - Inadequate infrastructure. 

 

Both the reasons are valid and closely intertwined. Better infrastructure attracts good faculty. That is precisely why six older IITs are still attracting better 
faculty despite the issues with a hegemonic hierarchy among the faculty across the departments. However, there are issues with the location of new IITs. Even 
there is a cross-movement of faculty from IIT Kanpur, IIT Kharagpur, and IIT Guwahati to better locations like IIT Bombay, IIT Madras, and IIT Delhi or IISc 
Bangalore. The planners keep forgetting that the time had changed a lot from the 1990s when the last of the six older IITs came into existence. 

 

Most green-field IITs are located a good 40-60Km away from the city airports and do not have any ancillary support systems such as schools, hospitals, and 
marketplaces. Without that, the institutes cannot attract good faculty. I believe IIT Hyderabad is located about 50 km from Hyderabad Airport, IIT Bhubaneswar is 
located about 35Km from the airport at Bhubaneswar. Hyderabad is a much bigger and more developed city compared to Bhubaneswar. Therefore, at least IIT Hyderabad 
could attract better faculty. The then MHRD of GoI opened new IITs without good DPR on human resources planning and other micro-level details.

 

Furthermore, except for IIT Bombay, the grooming of institutions did not deliver either to expectation or to potential. I am unsure if the grooming institutions 
willfully consented or the responsibilities were thrust on them. The majority of OSDs from the grooming institutions were interested in fulfilling grooming 
obligations for building their respective CVs.  IIT Jodhpur buildings were planned very well. I am not sure if it has equally good facilities for research. If 
so, it was not clear why the institute could not either attract or retain faculty.  

 

The CAG report says that 80% of the Ph. D. program seats remained vacant at IIT Bhubaneswar. The figure at IIT Gandhinagar is 64%. The occupancy rate of PG 
program is less than 75% across the eight IITs. Having strong Ph. D. programs would have eased the nonavailability of the faculty members to a great extent. 
Instead, IITs opened up Ph. D. admissions to only go for volume and to help faculty members acquire necessary eligibility for promotion. It led to a lot of 
untrained and ill-trained Ph. Ds unsuitable for faculty positions. I came across Ph. Ds from all IITs in recruitment selections and found fundamentals of the 
subject is lacking. I am not sure if IITs have done away with the requirements for coursework for the Ph. D. candidate. Of course, I know many IITs have diluted 
the requirements for the rigorous, comprehensive tests for the Ph. D registration.

 

The Director of IIT Bhubaneswar has voiced the nonavailability of qualified candidates as one of the main reasons for the low faculty strength. However, in my 
opinion, the perception of the academic circles outside about different IIT administration is the main reason why many good candidates shy away from applying to 
certain IITs. One of the prospective candidates from one of the top five universities in the US shared a few details about the visit of a particular IIT Director 
to his university. It was not at all flattering to say the least. Feedback from existing faculty about their boss is a big component of this perception. It is, 
therefore, advisable that IIT Directors realize that the happiness quotient of the existing faculty is extremely important. Do have an evaluation system that 
assists in career growth. Unnecessary bureaucratic hassle and roadblocks may intimidate young faculty. The middle-level ministerial staff of IITs should be 
sensitized to act as second fiddle. The registrar, the deputy registrars, and the faculty coteries around the Director should only act as facilitators, not as 
constrictors.  

 [Back to Index](../index.md)
