## Getting a Ph. D. from an Indian Institution 

Years back, I was visiting a relative's place at a central university in the eastern part of India. During a course of a casual evening gathering at my host's 
residence, one of the young professors jocularly commented that he would love to recruit one male and another female research scholars. He would get the male 
scholar to take care of outdoor errands, and the female scholar could double up as a housekeeper. I was flabbergasted by the comment. I was an undergraduate 
student at the time. Later, after joining as a research scholar at one of the institutes of national importance, I understood the meaning of the comment that I 
heard years back in that evening gathering. Let me describe a few anecdotes in this context.

One summer evening a professor our dept called us to his residence though I was not working under him. When we reached his home, we were given a bundle of 
examination papers to grade. I have no idea how to react. Nevertheless, after looking at the question paper for good 15 mts, I refused to grade, saying that I 
did not know the subject very well. Luckily I was not a mainstream subject scholar. Though the professor was not amused, he let me go. Other scholars graded the 
examination papers. Many of them were afraid to say that they did not know the subject. Fortunately, in the following year, the examination system introduced a 
central grading system for the examination. So, the practice of outsourcing of grading stopped.

One of our fellow scholars was asked to guard a professor's residence who went out of the station on vacation or short leaves. The same professor used to be the 
scholar's guest for special dinners twice a week. However, in the annual progress report, the professor marked the scholar's conduct as zero. It led to the 
scholar's academic program being terminated. Other scholars were outraged. The subsequent protests led to the reinstatement of the scholar. The anecdote reveals 
the extent to which a supervisor may exploit scholars, and possibly sometimes scholars do take advantage of the weakness of the supervisor in an equal measure.

I have a friend who had immense respect for his professor. However, every time his paper was accepted, I found the professor's name invariably appeared as the 
first author, and sometimes the name very close relative of the professor was also included. I had visited the friend's lab several times and came across the 
people whose names appeared in the authors' list. The contribution of the professor's relative was limited to preparing material for the experiments or being 
present in the meetings. It was unclear why so many names appear on the paper.

A professor submitted a thesis for a DSc to a well-known state University. The thesis is comprised of the publications jointly authored by his Ph.D. scholars. 
The same research was also submitted for PhDs of the respective scholars. I am not sure if some universities allow research publications to be submitted twice 
for different degrees. At least the self-declaration by a candidate says that the work reported in a thesis is not submitted elsewhere for a degree.

A professor was in-charge of SEM at the institute. The SEM facility was only one of its kind in that part of India. He had tons of publications. We came to know 
that the precondition for using SEM was to allow authorship credit to the professor. After getting a few awards, many influential professors and academicians 
turn into research managers. They corner all the research grants from government agencies through their influence. Anyone daring to go against this bunch of 
people's wishes does not get any funding. It is one of the reasons why experimental scientists is vanishing species.

Of course, there were many outstanding gentlemen among professors. I was lucky to have one such person as my supervisor. He always put his name as the last 
author in his scholars' papers. I remember one incidence when he somehow got to know that I helped another scholar in one of the publications, but the guy did 
not write even a single line of acknowledgment. My supervisor told me not to help that guy again in the future. He used to give us tips for survival in 
academics.

There are many such anecdotes. Narrating all of these will scare people away. Other blog readers may have such experiences but are perhaps unwilling to share. The academics survive only due to 10-15% of upright people. 

Networking is the key to survival in the academic world. Influential researchers in synergy with underachievers make the system tough for individualists. I have 
a friend who is extremely good at networking. Once, we were traveling together when told me that even the editors professional journal indulge in malpractices. 
He narrated an instance of one editor of a well-known journal who used to contact the authors of accepted papers and used his position to place himself as one of
the authors of the publications. There were also instances where certain sections of authors managed to receive acceptance letters even before submitting the 
manuscript of the paper.

There is a Netflix TV series called Doctor X. The series is based on the backdrop of Japan's crumbling health care system. University hospitals were full of useless, incompetent surgeons who exploited interns and built a corrupt healthcare system for mutual survivals. The lead character of the TV series is a female free-lance surgeon called Diamon Michiko. Dr. Michiko is depicted as a maverick, self-confident doctor. She tells her patients, "Watashi wa kesshite shippai shimasen" (I never fail). Her contract terms with the hospital are that she won't do anything not requiring a medical license. I wish research scholars could organize a contract agreement like Diamon Michiko before joining the Ph. D. program.
