## State of Primary and Middle Education in India

Jharkhand is carved mainly from Santhan Parganas and Chhotnagpur divisions of the then southern Bihar. It came into 
existence on November 15, 2000, which happens to be the birth anniversary of the tribal leader Birsa Munda. Birsa Munda was 
a tribal freedom fighter and religious movement leader of the late 19th century. Ranchi Airport is named after Birsa Munda. 
For more details about Birsa Munda the readers may refer to the wikipedia page. Recently, during random browsing of youtube 
channels, I came across a video on the state of primary and middle school education in Jharkhand. I don't remember the 
location of the place or the school's name where the anchor shot the video. However, it gives a telling commentary on the 
state of the state's primary and middle school education. The anchor presented the video in a local dialect of Hindi, which 
was difficult to comprehend in every detail. However, how he presented the video leaves no doubt about the message he 
wanted to convey.


Let me first dwell a bit on the video before focusing on the issues that the anchor wanted to bring out. The school in the 
video is a govt run middle school. It had an enrollment of 450, according to the school coordinator. The school employs 
four teachers against a sanctioned strength of eight. About 120 students are registered for class 8, but the classroom can 
hold just about 60 students. Hardly 40-45 students attend the school on any day. The building and infrastructure are in an 
abysmal state. The infrastructure is a problem, and the building is too cluttered for a decent school. Both daylight and 
ventilation are poor in the classroom. However, infrastructure and the building are more of a resource problem that could 
be solved with a good samaritan act by the state ministry of education. The bigger problem is the way that kids are being 
trained. 

Out of 45 odd students, only one can successfully name the subjects in the syllabus for class 8. When asked about maths, 
one student told the anchor that he could do up to 30. The anchor assumed that the student had memorized tables for numbers 
up to 30. The anchor wanted to double-check and asked the student to recite the table of 5. Then the student clarified he 
could only count up to 30! No student could correctly spell the names of months in a calendar. After erasing the month name 
three times, the teacher wrote February incorrectly. One of the smarter kids in the class corrected the spell, who 
incidentally could spell the word "science" correctly both in English and in Hindi.

The purpose of giving a short description of the video is not to denigrate the school possibly in the Palamau district but 
to understand the issues in the management of school education and the apathy of the state govt to create a vibrant base 
for higher and technical education in the state of Jharkhand. I believe most government-run schools are in similar 
conditions. Especially those located in villages and small semi-urban settlements in India. The primary issues that the 
video brings out are as follows:

- The teachers are unfit, and there is hardly any knowledge gap between the teacher and the taught.
- Education seems to be the last welfare priority for the party in power.
- The govt spending on schooling is non-existent or extremely low.
- The social awareness of the education sector is also very low among people, especially in underdeveloped states.

In general, the political parties are either apathetic or scared to empower people by educating them.
They depend only on giving out freebies for winning the election and capturing power.

A research report by a group of educators under the chairmanship of the UGC vice chairperson says India's GER in 2017-2018 
was around 27.4. It translates to 3.74 corers across roughly 1k universities 40K affiliate colleges. The report says EER 
(Eligibility Enrollment Ratio) should be more appropriate than GER. EER refers to the ratio of the eligible population. 
That admits the poor state of primary and school education in India. In other words, the suggestion to use EER is a 
sugarcoating offered to the politicians by the bureaucrats responsible for framing education policies for the gove. The 
report mentions GERs of 10 other nations, including the US, UK, Germany, France, Brazil, China, Indonesia, South Africa, 
and Pakistan. Understandably only South Africa and Pakistan have lower GER than India. China at 49.1% and Brazil at 51.3% 
GER are way ahead of India. The rest of the nations have GER over 60%, with US leading at 88.2%.

GOI appointed a new chairperson of UGC. Prof M. Jagadish was vice-chancellor of JNU and had served as a professor at IIT 
Delhi. He brings in considerable experience both as an academic administrator and educator. I believe he understands and 
realizes the situation more than anyone else in the Govt. However, I guess his task won't be easy given the country's 
primary and secondary education. Pulling up GER would be a herculean harakiri unless the state govts cooperate. Education 
is a concurrent subject under the constitution. It allows states to legislate and control the matters of education. Though 
having uniformity in education across India is undesirable, I believe the "knowledge quotient (KQ)" is an important issue. 
By KQ, I refer to an intrinsic understanding of the subject rather than specifics. However, in technical education, KQ may 
have a kind of uniformity across the country.

[Back to Index](../index.md)
